() So how many of you have heard this term before, () correlation is not causation? () When, what was the context? () Today's class is going to be a little bit lecture () I the basics about the concept () and then we'll have a puzzle or a game session. () What do you think about this? () Is this true? () No, why not? () But every time people have, there's data to support this. () You're making this claim based on data () and if you eat chicken, you get a good amount.
() Is this true? () No. () Data supports it. () Don't we rely on data? () No, no.
() Hmm? () Just because you eat such a chicken. () Data, that is true. () We rely on data these days.
() 50% of it's true. () 50% even if the data supports it? () Yeah. () Okay, good.
() What about this? () So this graph basically shows that countries () who consumes more chocolate are more likely () to have more number of Nobel laureates in their, () so Switzerland has the most number of Nobel laureates. () Is this true? () Maybe. () I can share the data with you guys later on () if you don't believe the data.
() Hey, this is. () Scotland's not even on there. () So now.
() How much chocolate can they eat in Scotland? () Probably none. () Not much. () So where is Scotland? () Yeah, so the highest is Switzerland, () then Germany, or maybe UK, Ireland, Norway.
() Okay, so you don't guys, you don't believe this. () What do you think about this? () So another, now I have a graph. () I have a data to support it, () and it says number of people who drown () by falling into a swimming pool () is correlated with number of films Nicolas Cage appears in.
() So this basically means, () so more films Nicolas Cage appears in, () there are more people drowning () or falling in the swimming pool. () Should we just ban him? () Yeah. () Right, so that people can be saved? () Okay.
() This is an interesting one. () It says, quit going to the lecture, () only use the outside resources, () and that would lead your grades to go up. () No? () Yes? () Okay, so if you quit right now this class, () and then I quiz you later, your grades are gonna go up.
() You'll get the highest grade () of all the people sitting here. () What? () Like time. () Time? () Okay, how does time factors in here? () Because if you could go into the lecture, () obviously you're doing something else in your time.
() But if it's just today, () then you really just don't grow or learn. () Okay, so this is not true. () Okay.
() You guys are very smart in studios. () You pay attention in class, you come to class. () Very good.
() What about this one? () So the UFO sighting in South Carolina () correlates with number of people () successfully climbing the Mount Everest. () No? () Come on, I show you guys data. () I show you guys graph.
() I support it with data. () You don't believe me? () That's not the cause of it. () Oh, what could be the cause of it? () Huh? () Time and place? () Okay, how's trains? () How does time and place relate to this? () Just a coincidence? () You're onto something.
() When do you think people typically go to climb Mount Everest? () Winter time? () Summer, right? () Summertime. () When are people more likely to be outside in South Carolina? () Winter? () Summer, right? () We're more likely to say, oh, that might be a UFO. () So it's just a correlation.
() But we are missing out this information () that it's summertime. () That's the common thing () which has not been plotted on this graph. () So I'm showing you the data.
() I'm showing you guys the graph, () but I'm withholding some information () which is a very important key that you are overlooking here. () What about this? () So sale of organic food per year increases () and that correlates with the number of people () getting diagnosed with autism. () Not true? () No? () Probably is true.
() Okay. () What about this one? () Yeah. () This is definitely true, right? () Yeah.
() The more ice cream you eat, () there are gonna be more shark attacks. () Definitely, there is a causation. () So the summer is the cause.
() That is causing the increase in the ice cream sale. () Summer is causing maybe sharks to come out more. () And that's why we say that, oh, there is a correlation.
() And people tend to miss out the correlation as causation. () It's not a cause, you are right. () You're absolutely right.
() They're correlated, but there's no causation () between the ice cream sales going up () that is not causing the increase in shark attacks. () It is just a correlation. () If you want to understand is there a causation, () there is no causation there.
() They are correlated because there's one variable () which is the summertime heat. () So you are absolutely right. () There is no causation in this.
() Maybe it will make sense when we look at the other examples. () So this is again the same thing. () So you see with the summertime, () the ice cream sales are going up.
() Summer doesn't cause the ice cream sales to go up. () So whatever data I have shown you guys, () why does it show those type of trends? () Like why do people plot those two different variables () that we have seen in future in the earlier slides () and we saw some sort of trend? () So this habit or this trend is known as data drenching. () When we don't understand what the variables in our data mean, () so imagine we have hundreds of variables.
() Rather than understanding what are the meaning () of those variables, we take those data () and then put it to some machine learning, some classifier () and try to come up with some stats. () And at times, some weird combination () of those variables would make sense, () just in the case of UFO sighting () and people going to Mount Everest. () It just made sense.
() So this practice is called data drenching () where we have thousands of variables in our data set. () We just rather than understanding our data set altogether, () we just start to compare every variable () with every other variable just randomly. () And so what is the best way to go instead of doing this () if you don't understand the data? () The first thing is to come up with a hypothesis.
() Why are we using this data? () What do we wanna achieve with this data? () So have a hypothesis and try to test our hypothesis () with whatever data set that we have been given. () And why does these things work? () Because typically there is lack of causal connections () and people use correlations as a mean () to connect these things and assume () that there is a causation in a given trend set. () I'm going to skip these things for the sake of time.
() Let's just dig into correlation. () The correlation is a relation () which exists between any phenomena, () anything or any variable. () It's a mathematical or a statistical variable () and it occurs together.
() So if two variables tends to increase together, () we say they are correlated. () Increase together, decrease together, () we say they are correlated. () And there are three different types of correlations.
() There's positive correlation, negative correlation () and zero correlation. () Any guesses what would be a positive correlation? () Positive means going up, yeah. () So positive basically means if two variables () are going up together in the same trend.
() So if you see a linear line in this direction, () that's a positive correlation. () Negative, so this is what a positive correlation mean. () So the variable associated with the small amount, () it changes, basically these variables () are moving together at the same time.
() Negative correlation basically mean () if one is increasing, the other is decreasing. () So let's take an example of the ice cream sale () and the shark attack. () The negative correlation would be () the more number of ice creams you eat, () there are less number of shark attacks.
() The positive correlation would be () the more number of ice creams you eat, () there are more shark attacks. () The third is zero correlation, () which basically means there is no association () between any of the variables that you are dealing with. () And correlation, the range for correlation () is minus one to one, () because it covers both the positive zero () and the negative range.
() Now let's talk about causality. () So causality, as we understand, () it's a relation between two given variables () where you can establish relations such as A causes B. () And we see causality in our day-to-day lifestyle. () And this is a basic term which you guys have () clearly understood that correlation is not causation.
() So if we say that younger drivers () have high probability of being in accident, () does that mean that age is a cause of accident? () No, is it? () We should stop giving younger kids cars. () Only people above 50 should be able to drive. () Anybody less than 50 should not drive.
() No? () Okay. () Okay. () So there are two things in causation, cause and effect.
() So something or someone that produces an effect, () result or a condition is known as the cause. () The effect is a change that results () when something is done or happens to it. () So can you think of anything about any causation () in day-to-day life? () So human beings are inherently have this causal mentality.
() Okay, how about this? () If I spend five minutes on this slide, () I stare five minutes on this slide, () that will cause me to not have the awesome puzzles () that I have prepared for you guys. () You won't be able to do those puzzles. () It is causal, right? () Very simple.
() Anybody wanna give me any cause, () causal thought that they had this morning? () It's counterfactuals. () So counterfactuals are hypothetical scenarios. () So you might be thinking, () oh, what if I got up and the alarm rang the first time? () I would have gotten ready at the right time.
() Those are counterfactuals, which are hypothetical. () It didn't happen, but you are just assuming () like, oh, what if it happened? () You must be paranoid to death. () What if you did not take so long to get up? () I would be on time.
() So another term with causality () is those counterfactual analysis or hypothetical scenarios. () So whenever you wanna look at correlations, () which the graphs that we saw, () you can think about what if the ice cream sale, () they actually did not go up, () would there still be shark attacks? () That's a counterfact, yes, right? () So the ice cream sale is not causing the shark attacks () as soon as you start thinking about the counterfactual () in this scenario, right? () So just because two events or properties are correlated, () it does not mean one causes the other. () So going to the hospital is positively correlated () with dying, but it does not mean () that just because you go to the hospital () that will cause you to die.
() That's a strong claim, right? () So there's no causation in there. () The more firefighters at the fire () is positively correlated with the amount of damage () done to the building, but that does not mean () that the firefighters are causing the damage. () I'm gonna skip these.
() Okay, fun part. () I'll give chance to each group () or I have a couple of puzzles maybe. () I think, okay, each group can get one puzzle at least.
() So group one, what was the group one? () Which was, who was group one? () Okay, so this question is for you. () Discuss with your group whether or not () you think the following correlations () are also causal relations. () So there's a positive correlation between age and income.
() Do you think this is causation? () Third, second option that you have is () there's a positive correlation between the house size () and the value of the house. () So the bigger the house, the more the value of the house. () There is a negative correlation between distance you drive () and the amount of gas in your tank.
() So which among these do you think are causal? () So you have these correlations. () Are these correlations actually causal? () And which one of these? () So the first one says there's a positive correlation () between age and income, () which basically means the older you get, () the more money you're gonna earn. () That's the positive correlation.
() That's what correlation is telling us. () Does that mean that age is causing us to get more money? () No, so not causal right there. () The second one is there's a positive correlation () between the house size and the value of the house.
() So the bigger the house, () the more money you have to pay for it. () That's the correlation. () Is that a causation? () Does the size of the house causes () the sale price of the house to go up? () No, why not? () You guys are right.
() That's absolutely correct. () The third one is causal. () But when you say causal, () you should also mention that () given these other things are not true.
() So given that there's no leakage in the gas tank, () everything is perfect, the car is running fine, () then yes, this would be the more distance you drive () will cause you to have, () I mean, the amount of gas in your tank will go down. () So that's a negative correlation. () And at the same time, it's a causation.
() So there's this term called common causal variable. () So it occurs when two events or measurements are correlated. () And the assumption is made that one causes the other.
() So there is some hidden variable () which we have not seen in the data, () which is leading us to have this correlation. () So basically our belief says X causes Y, () but there might be some variable Z. () So if you remember the case of ice cream sale () and shark attacks, the common variable is the summer. () So summer is causing both the increase in the ice cream sales () and the increase in the shark attacks.
() Some of the examples could be that Bob notices () every time he has a temperature, he does not feel well. () And the reason he gives is () because he has a high body temperature () that is actually causing him to not feel well. () Then Bob jumps into the ice bath, () concluding that if he lowers his body temperature, () he's gonna feel better.
() But he's missing out, he may be sick because of a virus () or maybe have some other type of a disease or a condition. () So the common cause here is the virus () and not just not relating the body temperature () with not feeling well. () Puzzle three, I had puzzle two, () I think it's been somewhere, but okay.
() We'll assume this is puzzle two, () but we'll go with group two. () Ready? () Okay. () So the puzzle three says, can't you see the flaw? () So a study from University of Pennsylvania, () which was published in May 1999, () is in the issue of Nature Magazine.
() So Nature Magazine on a journal, it's a scientific journal. () So if you ever wanna go online, look for nature, () you're gonna get a lot of scientific articles () and papers in that journal or magazine. () So in that magazine, this study was published, () which said that babies younger than two years old () who slept with the light on, () were at increased risk of developing myopia, () which is nearsightedness or shortsightedness () later in the childhood.
() So the kids who are younger than two years of old () who slept with light on, () were more likely to develop shortsightedness () when they grew up. () However, so in the current study of about 1200 children () conducted by Ohio State University researchers, () they found there is no relation () between the nighttime lighting () and the development of the shortsightedness () or nearsightedness. () It does not matter if you sleep in a dark room, () light room, or you have a nightlight on.
() So what the researchers did find, however, () was a strong link between nearsighted parents () and nearsighted children. () Is this true? () There's something wrong with this. () So the third point.
() So this is basically talking about () the data drenching part that we saw, () that we heard that whatever data we had, () we just throw it into the system () and asking the system to make analysis for us. () So we need to start. () Okay.
() So the question is, () it says you have to figure out the flaw in this study. () Okay. () So the first assumption, () the first time they did study in 99, () they claimed or they got this result () that kids who slept with nightlight on () were more likely to develop shortsightedness () when they grew up.
() That's the first analysis of the result they got. () Then recently they found out there is no such relation () between the nightlight on () or it doesn't matter if the kid is sleeping () in the dark room, light room. () There's no relation between the light () and the kid developing shortsightedness.
() You have a question? () It's the same, I think, probably. () And then the researchers said () they had one analysis from both of these studies () that there was a strong link () between the nearsighted parents. () So parents who are nearsighted or shortsighted () are more likely to have kids who are shortsighted.
() They saw that link. () Is that a true link? () Or there's something missing in this third? () Here's the answer. () So the researchers noticed () that the nearsighted parents () were more likely to use nightlights in their kid's room.
() You didn't say that. () You didn't say that. () And then the researchers also said () that they think it may be due to parents () or own poor sightedness, () eyesightedness that they're keeping the lights on.
() And they also said that they found genetics. () So you guys were onto something () because he said there was neuropathological waste. () They might play a role in causing myopia.
() Did you guys do get a point? () Yeah, this was a tough one. () This is really tough one. () Okay, so the next thing, () which is the oversimplification on multiple causes.
() So that's for group. () It's gonna come for group three. () So maybe group three needs to pay more attention.
() So this policy occurs more often in media. () So there'll be multiple causes of something () that you're watching on TikTok or Instagram reel () or some posts that you're scrolling. () And you only get to see or read or hear () one side of the story.
() But however, there might be multiple causes () or might be multiple events () that might have led to whatever news article () or a news clipping or a video reel () or a post that you're reading. () So sometimes you have heard statements like, () you will do better at work or school () if you have a good breakfast. () So I'm assuming that you guys had a good breakfast.
() I love biscuit and you guys love biscuit. () Even if you did not, you guys love biscuits. () So you're gonna excel in this puzzles that I'm giving you.
() So this may be true in general, () this hypothesis that if you do good, () if you do better at work or school, () you had a good breakfast, that's the reason. () But then might be multiple causes () for you doing good in school () that you guys are better prepared, () you are not sleeping, you can see the screen. () So you are well motivated, you're all healthy.
() So the normal belief, () if you just wanna put it in a hypothesis, () so belief could be A causes Z. () But what is happening in underlying is () that A is causing Z, then B is also causing Z, () some variable C is causing Z. () So there are multiple variables other than A () which are causing Z. () And sometimes we just oversimplify () and we just make our claim that A is the one () which is causing Z. () Okay, group three, raise your hand. () Where's group three? () Okay, all bronze. () So can you think of any more examples () of oversimplified cause? () And what other events may have many reasons for occurring? () So one example could be that the shark attacks () and the ice cream sale, let's say.
() So there are more people who are entering the water. () So there might be more sharks. () So maybe more people entering could cause it.
() Then the temperature could cause it. () Then maybe the migration pattern of sharks () coming to the beaches could cause the shark attacks. () So there are like multiple causes for the shark attacks.
() Ready? () Okay. () So these are the examples that I came up with. () So how fast you read a book causes () could be your reading abilities, () your book, length of the book () and the reading environment you're in.
() Then how long you spend time working on your homework, () the better you'll do. () So it could depend on how lengthy the homework is, () how difficult the homework is, () your level of understanding of the concepts, () your work environment and the amount of assistance () you might have received while you're doing the homework. () Okay, so this concept is for group four.
() So I hope you guys are paying attention. () So this is called bidirectional cause. () So when two events are result of a bidirectional causation, () one event causes another while other event causes the first.
() So they could be X causes Y, but it could be both ways. () So X is causing Y as well at the same time, () Y is causing X. () So some examples could be the number of lions in Kenya () affects the number of gazelles in Kenya. () So lions eat gazelles.
() But it is also true that the number of gazelles () also affect the number of lions in Kenya. () So if the lions don't have food, () they're probably gonna die with lack of food. () So this will lead to increase and decrease () of population in lion, () and will also cause the increase and decrease () in the population of gazelles.
() So this is called the predator-prey model, () which is more like a bidirectional causal relations. () You probably can request my puzzle. () Can you think of any examples of bidirectional causes? () So what are some of the advantages and disadvantages () that we learned from the correlation is non-causation? () So just doing merely correlation, it can save money, () it can save time, () you don't have to pay much attention to it.
() It can allow us to make these predictions () like food causing the increase in population, () and we can use the existing data. () But some of the disadvantages of just relying on correlation () is that we cannot establish cause and effect relationship. () They are prone to inaccurate reporting.
() As we just said, he rightly mentioned () that it's not a cause that the population grew up. () There might be confounding variables. () So confounding variables basically means () there might be some common variables () causing both the other variables, () which are cause and effect, () to go up and down at the same time.
() And in the correlation studies, () we cannot manipulate the data, () which basically means we cannot run studies () and say, what if I change this? () How would that affect my XYZ result in future? () So detection lies, () distinction lies in the nature of the relationship. () So correlation versus causation. () So correlation implies association.
() There might be some relation between two variables. () It tells us about the predictive capability () or a future analysis, () but it does not imply causation. () And causation implies direct influence.
() If we say something is a cause, () we know for sure one entity () would be affecting the other entity. () And that's it. () I hope you guys had fun.